Senior Automation QA Engineer (Python | Selenium | Playwright | API | SQL | CI/CD)

Core Automation
Python
Selenium
Playwright
PyTest
Page Object Model
Framework design
Logging
Reporting
Parallel execution

API
REST APIs
Authentication
JSON
Requests library
Postman
API automation

SQL
Joins
Window Functions
CTEs
Stored Procedures (concepts)
Query optimization basics

DevOps Basics
Git
GitHub
Jenkins
Docker
CI/CD pipelines

AI in Testing

This is increasingly important. We'll learn:

Using AI to generate test cases
AI-assisted automation
Prompting techniques for QA
Where AI helps—and where manual validation is still needed

Interview Readiness

You'll be prepared for questions like:

Explain your automation framework.
Why Playwright over Selenium?
How do you reduce flaky tests?
Describe your CI/CD integration.
What happens when an API returns HTTP 500?
Explain your synchronization strategy.
Design a framework from scratch.

The goal isn't memorizing answers—it's understanding the concepts so you can respond naturally.



Day 1: Python Fundamentals for Automation Engineers + Interview Mindset + Baseline Assessment.

Question 1 →  Start from Tell me About yourself


Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity.
My name is Parveen Kumar, and I have 10 years of experience in Software Testing, with strong expertise in Automation Testing using Python, Selenium, PyTest, API Testing, and SQL.
Currently, I'm working as a Senior Test Engineer at Tech Mahindra for AT&T, where I lead quality assurance activities across four enterprise applications. My responsibilities include automation development, regression testing, release validation, stakeholder communication, and supporting architecture migration initiatives.
Over the years, I've designed and maintained more than 2,000 test scenarios, contributed to automation improvements, collaborated closely with developers and product owners, and participated in CI/CD-based release processes using Git and Jenkins.
I enjoy solving quality challenges, improving automation coverage, and working with cross-functional teams.
I'm now looking for an opportunity where I can contribute to larger automation initiatives, continue growing technically, and take on greater ownership within a high-performing engineering team.

Question 2 →  Explain the difference between LIST, TUPLE, SET & DICTIONARY

A List is an ordered, mutable collection that allows duplicate values. It is used when the data needs to be modified dynamically.

fruits = ["Apple", "Banana", "Orange"]

fruits.append("Mango")
fruits[1] = "Grapes"
fruits.remove("Apple")

A Tuple is an ordered, immutable collection that allows duplicate values. It is commonly used for fixed data that should not change.

browser = ("Chrome", "120")

A set is unordered, mutable collection that don't allows duplicate values. Set has unique values only.

Home
Products
Offers
Home

set(menu_names)  // This is a practical QA use case.

A DICTIONARY is an ordered, mutable collection that allows duplicate values ( Key should be unique but values can be duplicate). It is commonly used for data structures in automation.

login_data = {
    "username": "admin",
    "password": "Admin123"
}

Or:

expected_response = {
    "status": "SUCCESS",
    "code": 200
}

Which data structure do you use the most in Selenium?

"In my automation projects, I mostly use lists and dictionaries. Lists are useful for handling collections of WebElements or test data, while dictionaries are very helpful for storing configuration values, test data, and validating API responses. Sets are useful when checking uniqueness, and tuples are suitable for fixed data."

I want you to explain:

What is each one?
Difference between them.
Which one is mutable?
Which one is fastest?
Where have you actually used them in Selenium automation?


Question 3 → "What happens internally when Selenium executes this line?" driver.find_element(By.ID, "username").click() 

Senior QA Automation Engineer , I should explain how it works internally, not like 4 yrs of tester. 

Step → 1, When Python executes this method, nothing happened in the browser yet.
Step → 2, For executing this method, we need a selenium client library that sends requests to the browser. The request follows the W3C webdriver protocol.
Step → 3, When Selenium sends the request directly to the browser , it can’t send it directly. For that we have to add, chromedriver for chrome, firefox driver for mozilla, Gheckdriver for edge.
Step → 4,  Browser driver receives the HTTP request, translates it to the commands that chrome browser understands.  Python → ChromeDriver → ChromeBrowser.
Step → 5, Browser searches the DOM, if it finds the element.
Step → 6, Element ID is returned, Chromedriver sends back the reference to selenium, selenium stores the reference.
Step → 7, Now, selenium sends another request, .CLICK() which means, click the element.

→ Why do we need ChromeDriver? 

"Browsers don't understand Selenium commands directly. ChromeDriver acts as a bridge between the Selenium client library and the Chrome browser by translating WebDriver protocol commands into browser-specific actions." 

What are 5 possible reasons?

Think like a troubleshooter.

For example:

Wrong locator
Element not yet loaded
Element inside an iframe
Another element blocking the click
Stale element reference


Day 2 Agenda

Today's session is going to be a little more challenging than yesterday.

Module 1 (10 mins) – Revision

I'll ask you questions from yesterday.

Module 2 (45 mins) – Python Functions & OOP

These are among the most frequently asked topics in automation interviews.

Module 3 (20 mins) – Selenium Architecture Deep Dive

We'll go beyond the basics and connect it to real project scenarios.

Module 4 (20 mins) – Mock Interview

I'll play the interviewer again.

Module 5 (10 mins) – Feedback & Homework

Question 1 --> Yesterday we discussed List, Tuple, Set and Dictionary.

Tell me:

Which of these are mutable?  -- List, Set and DICTIONARY
Which are immutable?  -- Tuple
Which allow duplicate values? -- List, Tuple, Dictionary
Which one is the fastest for searching --> Set and DICTIONARY

Question 2

Explain the Selenium Architecture without looking at your notes.

⭐ Senior-Level Interview Answer

"When Selenium executes the statement driver.find_element(By.ID, 'username').click(), the first step is that the Selenium Python client library receives the request from the Python script.

The Selenium client then creates an HTTP request following the W3C WebDriver Protocol and sends it to ChromeDriver.

ChromeDriver acts as a bridge between Selenium and the Chrome browser. It translates the WebDriver command into browser-specific instructions that Chrome understands.

Chrome searches the DOM for the element whose ID is username. If the element is found, Chrome returns an element reference back through ChromeDriver to the Selenium client.

When the .click() method is executed, Selenium sends another WebDriver command to ChromeDriver, which again forwards it to Chrome. Chrome then performs the click action on that element."

But a Senior Engineer should also explain what happens if the element is NOT found.

For example:

"If the element is not found, Selenium waits according to the configured wait strategy. If no matching element is found within the timeout period, it throws a NoSuchElementException."

Question 3

Imagine you're writing an automation framework.

Where would you use:

List  --> In Selenium automation, I typically use Lists to store multiple WebElements returned by the find_elements() method. This allows me to iterate through the elements for validation or interaction.
 
Dictionary --> Storing the configuration , test data, or API response.

Tuple -> For fixed value, Immutable configuration values

Set --> To remove the duplicate content from the list, for uniqueness

Follow Up Question --> 

Why don't we use a List for everything? Why do Python developers still use Tuples, Sets, and Dictionaries?

"Each Python collection serves a different purpose. I use a List when I need an ordered collection that may change during execution, such as storing multiple WebElements or test data. I use a Tuple for fixed configuration values because it's immutable. A Set is useful when uniqueness is important, for example validating that a menu doesn't contain duplicate items. A Dictionary is my preferred choice for configuration data, API responses, and test data because key-value access is fast and expressive. Choosing the right collection improves readability, maintainability, and performance where appropriate."


Follow Up Question --> 

If you were designing a Selenium framework from scratch today, where would you use Lists, Tuples, Sets, and Dictionaries?

Not isolated examples.

I want you to imagine the entire framework:

Configuration  --> In python selenium projects, dictionaries used to save the configuration.
Test Data --> Again Dictionaries
WebElements --> List
API Responses  --> Json format, will use dictionaries
Reports --> Key -- Values ( Dictionarie )
Environment Settings  --> Dictionarie


Day 2 Agenda

Let's begin with Question 1:

What is a function in Python, and why do we use functions in an automation framework?

⭐ How a Senior QA Engineer should answer

A function is a reusable block of code designed to perform a specific task. Instead of writing the same logic multiple times, we create a function once and call it whenever needed. This improves code reusability, readability, and maintainability.

Then explain why.

In automation frameworks, functions help us avoid duplicate code. Common actions such as launching the browser, logging into the application, capturing screenshots, waiting for elements, and reading test data are implemented as reusable functions. This makes the framework easier to maintain and update.

Why do we use Functions?

Without function

driver.find_element(By.ID,"username").send_keys("admin")
driver.find_element(By.ID,"password").send_keys("admin123")
driver.find_element(By.ID,"login").click()

Now imagine...

You have 250 test cases.

Will you write these three lines 250 times?

No.

Instead,

def login():
    driver.find_element(By.ID,"username").send_keys("admin")
    driver.find_element(By.ID,"password").send_keys("admin123")
    driver.find_element(By.ID,"login").click()

Now simply call

login()

Day 4 Agenda -->

What is the difference between a Parameter and an Argument?

In Selenium auotmation framework, paramter and arguments play a very important role. While creating the function, wedefine the parameter like username, password in any function, but while calling we can use it with different data set and can use it anywhere of the framework. No need to change the username and password again and again. With the help of parmater and argument, resusablity of code is very easy and you can mainin your project.

⭐ Senior-Level Answer

If I were interviewing you, I would love to hear something like this:

Parameters are the variables declared in the function definition, whereas arguments are the actual values passed to those parameters when the function is called.

Look at this code: 
def login(username, password="Welcome@123"):
 print(username, password)
 
 What will be the output of:
 
 login("Parveen") 
 
 Will it throw an error? -- No, it won't throw an error
 What will it print? -- Parveen Welcome@123
 Why? -- Becasue while caliing the function we are passing the 1 arguments and 2 is already persent in the paramter, so there will be no error, it will run properly.
 
 🏆 Senior-Level Answer

If I were interviewing you, an ideal answer would be:

No, it will not throw an error because the password parameter has a default value. During the function call, only the username argument is provided. Since no value is passed for password, Python automatically assigns the default value Welcome@123. Therefore, the output will be: Parveen Welcome@123

--> Increaing the difficulties

def login(username="admin", password="Welcome@123"):
    print(username, password)

login("Parveen", "Test@123")
Tell me:
Output?  The output will be Parveen Test@123
Why?  --> Becasue in the function we defined the default parameter, but in the arguments are calling the 2 arguments again, so it will override the value of existing one. Python assign the value that is using in the arguments, in case if we won't pass the value in the arguments then it will pick the by defualt value that is present in the parameter. 

⭐ Small Improvement

Instead of saying:

"It will override the value."

I would say:

"The default values are only used when an argument is not provided. Since both arguments are passed during the function call, Python uses the supplied values instead of the defaults."

def login(username="admin", password="Welcome@123"):
    print(username, password)

login(password="Secret@123")
Tell me:
What will be the output?  --> The output will be admin Secret@123
Why?  --> Python first read the paramter that present in the funtion and stored it, but when python checks while calling we are adding only 1 argument of password, then it will use calling argument not we dfeined as defualt. So at last the ouput will be admin Secret@123

⭐ Let's Make It Sound Like a Senior Engineer

Imagine you're sitting in an interview at Microsoft.

I would answer like this:

Python matches arguments with parameters by name. In this example, only the password argument is passed using a keyword argument. Since no value is provided for username, Python automatically uses its default value 'admin'. Therefore, the output will be admin Secret@123.

def login(username, password):
    print(username, password)

login(password="Welcome@123", username="Parveen")
Tell me:
Will it throw an error?   -- It wont thorw an error
What will be the output?  --> The outout will be  Parveen Welcome@123
Why?  --> Python check we passed two paramters in the function and while calling passed the 2 arguments but the sequence is changed. Python doedn't casre about the sequence it will check the values you passed in the paramter and the argument, it should be same. if its same it will add the argument to that parameter.

🏆 Let's Make It Sound Like a Senior Engineer

Imagine you're in an interview.

I would answer like this:

No, it will not throw an error because keyword arguments are matched by parameter name rather than by position. Although the arguments are passed in reverse order, Python maps username="Parveen" to the username parameter and password="Welcome@123" to the password parameter. Therefore, the output will be Parveen Welcome@123.

Why do we use return instead of print in automation frameworks?  -->

 In python auotmation frameworks, we can't work with return values, With the help of returns, you can call the function anywhere in the automation framework , and use the values. But print will show the putput everytime in the console.

Senior-Level Interview Answer

If an interviewer asks:

Why do we use return instead of print in automation frameworks?

A strong answer is:

We use return because it sends a value back to the calling function, allowing us to reuse that value in assertions, validations, or other functions. In contrast, print() only displays the output on the console and cannot be used for further processing.

For example, in my Selenium framework, methods such as get_page_title(), get_logged_in_user(), and get_error_message() return values so that test cases can validate the application behavior using assertions.

def add(a, b):
    print(a + b)

result = add(10, 20)

print(result)
Tell me:
What will be printed on the screen?  --> The correct answer is 30
What is the value of result? -- result will print 30
Why?  -- Pthyon function have 2 paramter and we print the value of it,and we create a varibale result call the funtion and pass two arguments, the value are not reurning anythng to the main funtion.
 
 Python creates the function. After printing, the function reaches the end. There is no return statement, So Python automatically returns None , result = None 
 30
None, result does not store the printed value. It stores the return value of the function.
 
 
 Why is result equal to None and not 30?  -->  Becasue result doenn't have reurn value, so it will not reurn anything, print wont't store anything after printing the value. So if you print result, print has no value, it has only none. 
 
 Let's Visualize It
Case 1: Using print()
 
def add(a, b):
print(a + b)

result = add(10, 20)
 
What happens internally?

 
add(10,20)

↓

print(30)

↓

Function Ends

↓

Python returns None automatically

↓

result = None
 

Case 2: Using return
 
def add(a, b):
return a + b

result = add(10,20)
 
Internal Flow

 
add(10,20)

↓

return 30

↓

result = 30
 
See the difference?


🔥 Real Selenium Framework Example
Imagine your Page Object has this method:

 
def get_user_name():
return driver.find_element(By.ID, "user").text
 
Your test case becomes:

 
user = get_user_name()

assert user == "Parveen"
 
Now imagine you had written:

 
def get_user_name():
print(driver.find_element(By.ID, "user").text)
 
Then:

 
user = get_user_name()
 
user becomes:

 
None



Day 5 Agenda --> 

What is *args?

Answer like this:

*args allows a function to accept a variable number of positional arguments. Python stores these arguments as a tuple. It is useful when the number of inputs is not fixed. In automation frameworks, it can be used for validating multiple UI elements or processing dynamic sets of data.

def fruits(*args):
    print(args)

fruits("Apple", "Mango", "Banana")
What will be printed?  -- ('Apple', 'Mango', 'Banana')
What is the type of args? --  Type is tuple, the value inside the tuple is string
Why does Python use a tuple instead of a list? --> 

🎤 Senior Interview Answer

If I ask:

Why is *args stored as a tuple instead of a list?

A strong answer is:

Python stores *args as a tuple because tuples are immutable. Function arguments are meant to represent the values passed by the caller, and immutability prevents accidental modification. Tuples are also slightly more memory-efficient than lists, making them a good choice for storing function arguments.

def total(*args):
    print(args)

total()

Tell me:

1. Will it throw an error?  --> No, it will not throw any error. "Accept zero or more positional arguments."
2. What will be printed?  -- it will print ()
3. What is the value of args? --> args = ()
4. Why? -- *args accepts any number of positional arguments, including zero. When no arguments are provided, Python creates an empty tuple (). Since the function simply prints args, the output is an empty tuple.

Selenium Example 

def validate_elements(*elements):
    for element in elements:
        print(element)

validate_elements()

Output ==> elements = ()

def numbers(*args):
    print(len(args))

numbers(10, 20, 30, 40)
Questions
What is the output? --> 4
Why? -->  Becasue *args returns type is tuple and while calling the funtion we use length so it will calaluctae the 4 varibale and print ( 4 )
What is the value of args internally? --> args = len(10,20,30,40)

Visual Difference
*args
def demo(*args):
    print(args)

demo(10,20,30)

Python creates

args = (10,20,30)

Tuple

**kwargs
def demo(**kwargs):
    print(kwargs)

demo(name="Parveen", age=35)

Python creates

kwargs = {
    "name":"Parveen",
    "age":35
}

Dictionary

def employee(**kwargs):
    print(kwargs)

employee(
    name="Parveen",
    company="Tech Mahindra",
    experience=10
)

Answer these four questions:

What will be printed?  --> {name = "Parveen", compnay ="Tech Mahindra", experience = 10}
What is the type of kwargs? --> Dictionarie
What are the keys in the dictionary?  --> name, company, experience
What are the values in the dictionary?  --> Parveen. Tech Mahindra, 10

def student(name, *subjects, **details):
    print(name)
    print(subjects)
    print(details)

student(
    "Parveen",
    "Python",
    "Selenium",
    company="Tech Mahindra",
    experience=10
)
Answer these questions:
What will name print?  --> As i can see, in the name, it will print "Parveen".
What will subjects print? -->  Subject will print  = ("Parveen", "Python","Selenium")
What will details print?  --> Details will print = { company:"Tech Mahindra",experience:10}
Why is "Parveen" not stored inside subjects?  -> Becasue as per the python logic *args type is tuple, so first value assigned to name varibale, we can't change it, it assign to name varibale, next time we will call subject so it will pick Python and selenium.

Day 6 AGenda -->  Class, Object Self and Constructor

Question 1: Why do Selenium frameworks use classes instead of writing all functions in one file?

We use classes because they help organize the automation framework in a structured and maintainable way. In a real project, each page contains many locators and methods. If all locators and functions are written in a single file, the code becomes difficult to read, debug, and maintain.

In my Tech Mahindra project, we handled multiple applications with hundreds of test cases. We kept each page in a separate class, such as LoginPage, DashboardPage, and PaymentPage. This allowed us to encapsulate all locators and actions related to that page in one place.

The main benefits are better readability, easier maintenance, code reusability, and reduced impact when changes happen on a specific page. For example, if a locator changes only on the Payment page, we update that class without affecting the rest of the framework.

class LoginPage:

    def login(self):
        print("Login Successful")
Tell me:

What is self?  --> Self is the reefrence of the current object of the class. It allow us to use all method and varibales inside the class.
Who passes the value to self? -> Python automatically passes the current object.
Why don't we pass it manually while calling the method?  --> We don't pass self manually because Python automatically passes the current object when we call a method using an object. This makes the syntax cleaner and easier to use..

class LoginPage:

    def __init__(self, driver):
        self.driver = driver

    def login(self):
        print(self.driver)

page = LoginPage(driver)
page.login()


🎯 Question

When is __init__() called?  -->  Constructor automatically invokes when we create the instance of that class.
page = LoginPage(driver)  // The moment Python creates the object:
It automatically executes:   __init__(self, driver)

Who calls __init__()?  --> Python automatically calls the __init__() constructor whenever a new object of the class is created.
 
Why do we write self.driver = driver instead of just driver = driver?   --> Python stores the value inside the object.ow every method inside the class can access it.


How is this useful in a Selenium Page Object Model?  --> In selenium its very userful, no needto define driver again and again, we will define in our main and calls it anywhere in our framework.


Which one is a class variable?  -- Code 1 is a class varibale because driver is a class variable because it is declared directly inside the class, outside any method. It is shared by all objects of that class unless overridden.

Which one is an instance variable?  --> Code 2 is the instance varibale, becasue here we dfine the constructor, self is the reference of the current object of the class.

self.driver is an instance variable because it belongs to a specific object (instance). Every object gets its own copy of self.driver.

Day 7 AGenda --> 

Which one would you use in a Selenium framework?  -->  Code 2, Professional Selenium frameworks use instance variables.
Why? --> Becasue of readablity of the driver, we can define one time and use it anywhere in the main class.

🎤 Interview Answer

If an interviewer asks:

Why do Selenium frameworks use instance variables instead of class variables for WebDriver?

A strong answer would be:

WebDriver should be stored as an instance variable because each page object should work with its own driver instance. Instance variables prevent unwanted sharing of state between objects, improve encapsulation, and support parallel test execution. Class variables are shared across all instances, which can lead to unexpected behavior in automation frameworks.


class BasePage:

    def click(self):
        print("Click from BasePage")


class LoginPage(BasePage):
    pass


page = LoginPage()

page.click()
Tell me:
What will be the output  --> Click from BasePage
Why can LoginPage call click() even though it doesn't define the method?  --> LoginPage inherits from BasePage, so it automatically gets access to all public methods and attributes of the parent class. Since click() is not found in LoginPage, Python looks in BasePage and executes that method.
Where does Python search for the click() method first?  --> Becasue we created an object of login page. Object create the memorey of the class, first thing it will check the click method in the LoginPage class, then move to baseclass.

Day 8 AGenda --> 

class BasePage:

    def click(self):
        print("Click from BasePage")


class LoginPage(BasePage):

    def click(self):
        print("Click from LoginPage")


page = LoginPage()

page.click()
🎯 Tell me:
What will be the output?  --> The Output will be Click from LoginPage
Why doesn't Python execute BasePage.click()?  --> Python first searches for the method in the child class (LoginPage). Since click() is found there, it executes that method and stops searching. It does not continue to the parent class (BasePage).
What is this concept called?  -> This is Method Overriding, which is a form of Runtime Polymorphism.
In what Selenium scenario would you override a method like this? --> Capture screenshot, wait, select, browser login


class BasePage:

    def login(self):
        print("Login from Base")

class LoginPage(BasePage):
	pass
page = LoginPage()

page.login()
Questions
What will be the output?  --> Login from Base
Is this inheritance or overriding?  --> This is inheritence not overriding, 
Why? -- overrding comes in the picture when child has same function name like parent class. Currently it's not overrding, it's inherting.
What if LoginPage defines its own login() method? What concept would that demonstrate?  --> Then its the concept of overriding.


🎯 Mentor's Assignment

Let's check your understanding.

Question 1

What will be the output?

class BasePage:

    def open(self):
        print("Base Page")


class LoginPage(BasePage):

    def open(self):
        print("Login Page")


page = LoginPage()
page.open()

Ouput --> Python first searches for the open() method in the child class (LoginPage). Since it finds the method there, it executes it and does not continue searching in the parent class (BasePage). This is Method Overriding."
.
Question 2

Will this work in Python?

class Demo:

    def login(self):
        print("Login 1")

    def login(self, username):
        print("Login 2")
What will happen?   --> It will print the last value.
Why? --> Python does not support true method overloading. If multiple methods have the same name, the last definition replaces the previous ones. To achieve similar behavior, we use default arguments, *args, or **kwargs.

Now I want to ask you a company-level interview question.

Suppose I ask:

class Calculator:

    def add(self, *args):
        return sum(args)

Question:

Why did the developer use *args instead of writing: In Python why we use *args, where we can add more than one arguments while creating the object of the class.

def add(self, a, b):

What problem is *args solving?  --> For now, we have sum of 2 argument like a , b but in future we know it will incerase to z, we can't change our method everyehere so for that we will use *args and pass the argument when calling the function. It will help us to increase the readability pf the framework.

We use *args when the number of inputs is not fixed. Instead of modifying the function signature every time the requirement changes, *args allows the method to accept any number of positional arguments. This makes the code more flexible, reusable, and easier to maintain. In automation frameworks, this is useful when utility methods need to handle varying numbers of values without requiring code changes.

********"Why is Page Object Model (POM) considered one of the best design patterns for Selenium automation?"

Okay, the answer is why we follow the design patern, In POM, we folow OOPS concept, like we every pages have its own classes where we define the methods like clicklogin, username, password. So that we hide the internal implementation of methods inside the class. Ither classes don't know how its works. Same we we create a base class, where we define the common methods, calls it main funtion.

Agenda 9 --> Today's Learning Plan

We'll cover:

✅ What is PyTest?
✅ Why companies prefer PyTest over unittest
✅ Test Discovery
✅ Assertions
✅ Basic Project Structure
⏳ Fixtures (Tomorrow - Deep Dive)
⏳ conftest.py
⏳ Parametrization
⏳ pytest.ini

What is Pytest --> Pytest is an Python testing framework that used for writing, execute, manage, organize and report the test cases efficencly. With the help of pytest, we can use or help or support Fixtures, Parametrizates, assertion, support diferent plugins, integrates with selenium and CI/CD pipelines

login.py

test_login.py

payment.py

test_payment.py

dashboard_test.py

test_dashboard.py
Questions
Which files will PyTest automatically discover?  - test_login, test_payment, test_dashboard, dashboard_test

Why? PyTest follows naming conventions during test discovery. By default, it searches for files named test_*.py and *_test.py. This allows it to automatically discover and execute test cases without manually specifying each file.

Why do companies follow these naming conventions instead of naming files however they like? --> Companies have large and huge applications where we have 5000 automation test scripts. if there is no naming concentiion, how pyTest know which files contain tests? It can't.

Instead, everyone follows the same naming convention. Now PyTest automatically finds every test.

What is ASSERTION ?
Before I explain assertions, I have one simple question.

Suppose your Selenium script is:
driver.find_element(By.ID, "username").send_keys("Parveen")
driver.find_element(By.ID, "password").send_keys("Test@123")
driver.find_element(By.ID, "login").click()

After clicking Login, how does PyTest know whether the test passed or failed?  --> "PyTest will execute the script successfully, but since there is no assertion or validation, it cannot verify whether the login actually succeeded. Therefore, the test may pass simply because no exception occurred."

Pytest Vs Unittest

Pytest and Unittest are two widely used Python testing frameworks for writing and executing automated tests. Both help developers improve software quality, detect bugs early, and maintain reliable applications.

Pytest is known for its simple syntax, flexibility, and powerful features.
Unittest provides a structured, class-based testing approach and is included in Python’s standard library.

What is PyTest?  --> Pytest is a python testing framework that allows us to write , manage, execute and report the test casese efficencly. Pytest also provide very good support like fixtures, paramterize, assertion, test discovery, strong plugin support, third party library, intergrated with selenium and CI/CD pipelines.

Why do we use assertions?  --> Assertions are used to validate that the actual application behavior matches the expected behavior. Without assertions, PyTest can only confirm that the script executed without errors—it cannot confirm that the application's functionality is correct. Assertions are what determine whether a test case truly passes or fails from a business perspective.

Suppose you wrote:

driver.find_element(By.ID,"login").click()

No assertion.

Will PyTest always know whether login is successful?  --> No, if you didn't add the assertion, pytest don't know whether it's fail or pass.

Why? -->  if you didn't add the assertion, pytest don't know whether it's fail or pass.

Suppose an interviewer asks:
Can Selenium work without PyTest?  → Yes. Selenium can work without PyTest because it is a standalone browser automation library. We can execute Selenium scripts directly using Python. However, in enterprise automation frameworks, Selenium is usually integrated with PyTest because PyTest provides test execution, assertions, fixtures, reporting, and better framework management.
And another question: 
Can PyTest work without Selenium? --> Yes pytest work without selenium, selenium integrates in pytest so pytest don't need persmission to selenium for executing the script.
Think carefully before answering.

DAY 10 --> 

What is a PyTest fixture, and why do we use it in Selenium automation?

Don't give me the textbook definition.

Explain it in your own words, including:

What problem does it solve?  --> Fixture solve the code duplicate and helps to manage the framework.
What does it provide to the test?  --> It will provide the strong support of setup and tear down the script. We added in one file and for 100 test script we can use.
What happens before and after the test? --> Before, if we are importing pytest and selenium library in out file. and use fixtures, it  will pick the test and perform the action, after that yield will play a importatn role. After performing the action, it will to yield, yield handed over to test. When test finishes, it will execute the driver.quit() function to close method.

"A PyTest fixture is a reusable mechanism used to provide common resources and handle setup and teardown for test cases. 

In Selenium automation, we commonly use fixtures to create and configure the WebDriver before a test and close the browser
 after the test. This avoids duplicating browser setup and teardown code across hundreds of test cases and makes the framework easier to maintain.
 With yield, we can provide the WebDriver to the test, and once the test finishes, PyTest resumes execution after yield to perform the cleanup."
 
 Challenge — yield vs return. Now we're going one level deeper. Consider:
Version A
@pytest.fixture
def driver():
    driver = webdriver.Chrome()
    yield driver
    driver.quit()
Version B
@pytest.fixture
def driver():
    driver = webdriver.Chrome()
    return driver
    driver.quit()
🎯 Question
What is the problem with Version B?
And more importantly:
Why is yield preferred over return when we need both setup and teardown in a PyTest fixture?
In Pytest framework, yield play a very important role, In pytest, once we open the browser, it will execute all the scripts present or writtien in test file and yield.driver has the responsibility to verify the that all scripts are executed, once its done it will send webdriver to driver.quit function. Why we can't use return method becasue return vlaue didn't very the scripts, it will get the value and before executing the all test scripts it will quit the browser.  


Absolutely. Since we've just completed yield vs return, today's agenda should continue naturally into PyTest fixture architecture rather than jumping to a completely new area.

🚀 QA Switch 2026 — Today's Agenda
1️⃣ Quick Revision — 10 min

We'll quickly test your understanding of:
PyTest is a Python testing framework used to write, organize, execute, and validate test cases efficiently. It provides features suchas fixtures, parametrization, assertions, test discovery, plugins, and integration with Selenium and CI/CD pipelines.

Test discovery  --> PyTest has built-in test discovery that automatically identifies test files and test functions based on naming conventions and executes the discovered tests.

Selenium vs PyTest  --> Selenium automates browser interactions, while PyTest manages test execution, validation, fixtures, discovery, and reporting.

Fixtures --> Fixtures is used for setup and teardown the function, Fixture provide us the resubale mechanism for all the test scripts.

yield vs return --> Give the resource to the test, pause the fixture, and resume after the test finishes so teardown can execute."
"Return the value and terminate the function."
No long explanations—just

🟢 Module 4: What is fixtures Scope ?

🎯 Interview question for you

Suppose we have:

@pytest.fixture(scope="function")
def driver():
    driver = webdriver.Chrome()
    yield driver
    driver.quit()

and:

def test_login(driver):
    pass

def test_payment(driver):
    pass
How many Chrome browser instances will PyTest create?

A) 1
B) 2
C) 100
D) Depends on the number of fixtures--> The answer is 2